A plum is a fruit of the subgenus Prunus of the genus Prunus. The subgenus is distinguished from other subgenera (peaches, cherries, bird cherries, etc.) in the shoots having terminal bud and solitary side buds (not clustered), the flowers in groups of one to five together on short stems, and the fruit having a groove running down one side and a smooth stone (or pit).

Mature plum fruit may have a dusty-white coating that gives them a glaucous appearance. This is an epicuticular wax coating and is known as "wax bloom". Dried plum fruits are called dried plums or prunes, although prunes are a distinct type of plum, and may have antedated the fruits now commonly known as plums.

Description

Plums are a diverse group of species. The commercially important plum trees are medium-sized, usually pruned to 56 m high. The tree is of medium hardiness. Without pruning, the trees can reach 12 m in height and spread across 10 m. They blossom in different months in different parts of the world; for example, in about January in Taiwan and early April in the United Kingdom.

Fruits are usually of medium size, between 1 and 3 inches in diameter, globose to oval. The flesh is firm and juicy. The fruit's peel is smooth, with a natural waxy surface that adheres to the flesh. The plum is a drupe, meaning its fleshy fruit surrounds a single hard seed.

Species

Plum has many species, and taxonomists differ on the count. Depending on the taxonomist, between 19 and 40 species of plums exist. From this diversity, only two species, the hexaploid European plum (Prunus domestica) and the diploid Japanese plum (Prunus salicina and hybrids), are of worldwide commercial significance. The origin of these commercially important species is uncertain, but may have involved P. cerasifera and possibly P. spinosa as ancestors. Other species of plums variously originated in Europe, Asia, and America.

The subgenus Prunus is divided into three sections:
Sect. Prunus (Old World plums)- leaves in bud rolled inwards; flowers one to three together; fruit smooth, often wax-bloomed Sect. Prunocerasus (New World plums) - leaves in bud folded inwards; flowers three to five together; fruit smooth, often wax-bloomed Sect. Armeniaca (apricots) - leaves in bud rolled inwards; flowers very short-stalked; fruit velvety; treated as a distinct subgenus by some authors 
Cultivation and uses

The taste of the plum fruit ranges from sweet to tart; the skin itself may be particularly tart. It is juicy and can be eaten fresh or used in jam-making or other recipes. Plum juice can be fermented into plum wine. In central England, a cider-like alcoholic beverage known as plum jerkum is made from plums.

Dried plums (or prunes) are also sweet and juicy and contain several antioxidants. Plums and prunes are known for their laxative effect. This effect has been attributed to various compounds present in the fruits, such as dietary fiber, sorbitol, and isatin. Prunes and prune juice are often used to help regulate the functioning of the digestive system. Dried prune marketers in the USA have, in recent years, begun marketing their product as "dried plums" due to "prune" having negative connotations connected with elderly people suffering from constipation.

Dried, salted plums are used as a snack, sometimes known as saladito or salao. Various flavors of dried plum are available at Chinese grocers and specialty stores worldwide. They tend to be much drier than the standard prune. Cream, ginsing, spicy, and salty are among the common varieties. Licorice is generally used to intensify the flavor of these plums and is used to make salty plum drinks and toppings for shaved ice or baobing.

Pickled plums are another type of preserve available in Asia and international specialty stores. The Japanese variety, called umeboshi, is often used for rice balls, called onigiri or omusubi. The ume, from which umeboshi are made, is more closely related, however, to the apricot than to the plum.

As with many other members of the rose family, plum seeds contain cyanogenic glycosides, including amygdalin. These substances are capable of decomposing into a sugar molecule and hydrogen cyanide gas. While plum seeds are not the most toxic within the rose family (the bitter almond is the most toxic), large doses of these chemicals from any source are hazardous to human health. However, plums are considered a source of phytochemical compounds with beneficial effects on health.

Prune kernel oil is made from the fleshy inner part of the pit of the plum.

Plums occur in a wide variety of colours and sizes. Some are much firmer-fleshed than others, and some have yellow, white, green, or red flesh, with equally varying skin colour.

Though not available commercially, the wood of plum trees is used by hobbyists and other private woodworkers for musical instruments, knife handles, inlays, and similar small projects.

Plum cultivars in use today include:
'Damson' (purple or black skin, green flesh, clingstone, astringent) 'Greengage' (firm, green flesh and skin even when ripe) 'Mirabelle' (dark yellow, predominantly grown in northeast France) 'Satsuma' (firm red flesh with a red skin) 'Victoria' (yellow flesh with a red or mottled skin) 'Yellowgage' or golden plum (similar to 'Greengage', but yellow) 
When it flowers in the early spring, a plum tree is covered in blossoms, and in a good year about 50% of the flowers are pollinated and become plums. Flowering starts after 80 growing degree days.

If the weather is too dry, the plums do not develop past a certain stage, but fall from the tree while still tiny, green buds, and if the weather is unseasonably wet or if the plums are not harvested as soon as they are ripe, the fruit may develop a fungal condition called brown rot. Brown rot is not toxic, and very small affected areas can be cut out of the fruit, but unless the rot is caught immediately, the fruit will no longer be edible. Plum is used as a food plant by the larvae of some Lepidoptera, including November moth, willow beauty, and short-cloaked moth.

The Serbian plum (Serbian: / sljiva) is the third-most produced in the world. In the Balkans, plum is converted into an alcoholic drink named slivovitz (plum brandy) (Serbian: / sljivovica).

A large number of plums, of the 'Damson' variety, are also grown in Hungary, where they are called szilva and are used to make lekvar (a plum paste jam), palinka (traditional fruit brandy), plum dumplings, and other foods. The region of Szabolcs-Szatmar, in the northeastern part of the country near the borders with Ukraine and Romania, is a major producer of plums.

The plum blossom or meihua (Chinese: ; pinyin: meihua), along with the peony, are considered traditional floral emblems of China.

The plum is commonly used in China, Yunnan area, to produce a local plum wine with a smooth, sweet, fruity taste and around 12% alcohol by volume.

History

Plums may have been one of the first fruits domesticated by humans. Three of the most abundant cultivars are not found in the wild, only around human settlements: P. domestica has been traced to East European and Caucasian mountains, while P. salicina and P. simonii originated in Asia. Plum remains have been found in Neolithic-age archaeological sites along with olives, grapes, and figs.

Etymology and names

The fruit P. armeniaca gained its name from the beliefs of Pliny the Elder, a Roman historian and scientist of the first century, who maintained the apricot was a kind of a plum, and had originally come from Armenia. Armenian sources support their claims by referring to a 6,000-year-old apricot pit found in an archaeological site near Yerevan. Apricots were cultivated in Mesopotamia, and it

In certain parts of the world, some fruits called plums are quite different from fruits known as plums in Europe or the Americas. For example, marian plums are popular in Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia, otherwise also known as gandaria, plum mango, ma-praang, ma-yong, ramania, kundang, rembunia'rembunia, or setar. Another example is the Japanese plum, popular as pipa or Chinese plums in East Asia and Southeast Asia, and as Japanese medlar, loquat, nispero, bibassier, and wollmispel elsewhere. In South Asia and Southeast Asia, jambul - a fruit from tropical tree in Myrtaceae family, is similarly sometimes referred to 'Damson' plums, and it is different from 'Damson' plums found in Europe and the Americas. Jambul is also called Java plum, Malabar plum, jaman, jamun, jamblang, jiwat, salam, duhat, koeli, jambulao, or koriang.

Production

Plums are produced around the world, and China is the world's largest producer. The table above shows the 10-largest producers of plums and sloe in 2013; the second to tenth rankings change almost every year due in part to the alternate-bearing nature of plum trees.

In the United States, the Japanese varieties of plums are predominant. California was the dominant producer in 2011; other producers are Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and Michigan. Mild winters, minimal rainfall during the growing season and low humidity favor more productive crops in California.

See also

References
Khanizadeh, S. and J. Cousineau. 2000. A Fully Bilingual Book Entitled "Our Plums/ Les Pruniers de Chez Nous", A Description of Over 60 Plum Cultivars Evaluated in Quebec along with Over 150 Coloured Images. Publisher Shahrokh Khanizadeh for the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Ed: S. Khanizadeh. ISBN 0-660-61568-1. 
External links
Prunus americanum images hosted by the Department of Biological Sciences of Vanderbilt University A horticulturist exchange for Plum trees and orchards North Dakota University Plum trees A University of Georgia exchange center Plum orchards information Ministry of Agriculture, British Columbia, Canada